% title = "Updates to Network Address Translation (NAT) Behavioral Requirements"
% abbrev = "Updates to NAT Behavioral Requirements"
% category = "bcp"
% docName = "rfc-7857"
% ipr= "trust200902"
% area = "Internet"
% workgroup = "Network Working Group"
%
% date = 2016-04-01T00:00:00Z
%
% [[author]]
% initials="R."
% surname="Penno"
% fullname="Reinaldo Penno"
% organization = "Cisco Systems, Inc."
%   [author.address]
%   email = "repenno@cisco.com"
%   [author.address.postal]
%   street = "170 West Tasman Drive"
%   city = "San Jose"
%   code = "95134"
%   country = "United States"
%
% [[author]]
% initials="S."
% surname="Perreault"
% fullname="Simon Perreault"
%   [author.address]
%   email = "sperreault@jive.com"
%
% [[author]]
% initials="M."
% surname="Boucadair"
% fullname="Mohamed Boucadair"
% role="editor"
%   [author.address]
%   email = "mohamed.boucadair@orange.com"
%   [author.address.postal]
%   street = "Orange"
%   city = "Rennes"
%   code = "35000"
%   country = "France"
%
% [[author]]
% initials="S."
% surname="Sivakumar"
% fullname="Senthil Sivakumar"
%   [author.address]
%   email = "mohamed.boucadair@orange.com"
%   [author.address.postal]
%   street = "Orange"
%   city = "Rennes"
%   code = "35000"
%   country = "France"


.# Abstract

This document clarifies and updates several requirements of RFCs
4787, 5382, and 5508 based on operational and development experience.
The focus of this document is Network Address Translation from IPv4
to IPv4 (NAT44).

This document updates RFCs 4787, 5382, and 5508.

{mainmatter}

# Introduction

[@!RFC4787], [@!RFC5382], and [@!RFC5508] contributed to enhance Network
Address Translation (NAT) interoperability and conformance.
Operational experience gained through widespread deployment and
evolution of NAT indicates that some areas of the original documents
need further clarification or updates.  This document provides such
clarifications and updates.

## Scope

The goal of this document is to clarify and update the set of
requirements listed in [@!RFC4787], [@!RFC5382], and [@!RFC5508].  The
document focuses exclusively on NAT44.

The scope of this document has been set so that it does not create
new requirements beyond those specified in the documents cited above.

Requirements related to Carrier-Grade NAT (CGN) are defined in
[@?RFC6888].

## Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
"SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this
document are to be interpreted as described in [@!RFC2119].

The reader is assumed to be familiar with the terminology defined in
[@?RFC2663], [@!RFC4787], [@!RFC5382], and [@!RFC5508].

In this document, the term "NAT" refers to both "Basic NAT" and
"Network Address/Port Translator (NAPT)" (see Section 3 of
[@!RFC4787]).  As a reminder, Basic NAT and NAPT are two variations of
traditional NAT in that translation in Basic NAT is limited to IP
addresses alone, whereas translation in NAPT is extended to include
IP addresses and transport identifiers (such as a TCP/UDP port or
ICMP query ID); refer to Section 2 of [@?RFC3022].

# TCP Session Tracking

[@!RFC5382] specifies TCP timers associated with various connection
states but does not specify the TCP state machine a NAT44 should
follow as a basis to apply such timers.

Update:
: The TCP state machine depicted in Figure 1, adapted from
    [@!RFC6146], SHOULD be implemented by a NAT for TCP session tracking purposes.

{#fig-simplified-state}
~~~~~
                +----------------------------+
                |                            |
                V                            |
             +------+   Client               |
             |CLOSED|-----SYN------+         |
             +------+              |         |
                 ^                 |         |
                 |TCP_TRANS T.O.   |         |
                 |                 V         |
             +-------+          +-------+    |
             | TRANS |          |  INIT |    |
             +-------+          +-------+    |
               |    ^               |        |
         data pkt   |               |        |
               | Server/Client RST  |        |
               |  TCP_EST T.O.      |        |
               V    |           Server SYN   |
          +--------------+          |        |
          | ESTABLISHED  |<---------+        |
          +--------------+                   |
           |           |                     |
     Client FIN    Server FIN                |
           |           |                     |
           V           V                     |
    +---------+   +----------+               |
    |  C FIN  |   |  S FIN   |               |
    |   RCV   |   |    RCV   |               |
    +---------+   +----------+               |
        |             |                      |
    Server FIN      Client FIN            TCP_TRANS
        |             |                    T.O.
        V             V                      |
    +----------------------+                 |
    |   C FIN + S FIN RCV  |-----------------+
    +----------------------+
Legend:
  * Messages sent or received from the server are
    prefixed with "Server".
  * Messages sent or received from the client are
    prefixed with "Client".
  * "C" means "Client-side".
  * "S" means "Server-side".
  * TCP_EST T.O. refers to the established connection
    idle-timeout as defined in [RFC5382].
  * TCP_TRANS T.O. refers to the transitory connection
    idle-timeout as defined in [RFC5382].
~~~~~
Figure: Simplified Version of the TCP State Machine

## TCP Transitory Connection Idle-Timeout

The transitory connection idle-timeout is defined as the minimum time
a TCP connection in the partially open or closing phases must remain
idle before the NAT considers the associated session a candidate for
removal (REQ-5 of [RFC5382]).  However, [RFC5382] does not clearly
state whether these can be configured separately.

Clarification:
: This document clarifies that a NAT SHOULD provide
    different configurable parameters for configuring the open and
    closing idle timeouts.

    To accommodate deployments that consider a partially open timeout
    of 4 minutes as being excessive from a security standpoint, a NAT
    MAY allow the configured timeout to be less than 4 minutes.
    However, a minimum default transitory connection idle-timeout of 4
    minutes is RECOMMENDED.

## TCP RST

[RFC5382] leaves the handling of TCP RST packets unspecified.

Update:
: This document adopts a similar default behavior as in
    [RFC6146].  Concretely, when the NAT receives a TCP RST matching
    an existing mapping, it MUST translate the packet according to the
    NAT mapping entry.  Moreover, the NAT SHOULD wait for 4 minutes
    before deleting the session and removing any state associated with
    it if no packets are received during that 4-minute timeout.

    Notes:

    *  Admittedly, the NAT has to verify whether received TCP RST
        packets belong to a connection.  This verification check is
        required to avoid off-path attacks.

    *  If the NAT immediately removes the NAT mapping upon receipt of
        a TCP RST message, stale connections may be maintained by
        endpoints if the first RST message is lost between the NAT and
        the recipient.

# Port Overlapping Behavior

REQ-1 from [RFC4787] and REQ-1 from [RFC5382] specify a specific port
overlapping behavior; that is, the external IP address and port can
be reused for connections originating from the same internal source
IP address and port irrespective of the destination.  This is known
as Endpoint-Independent Mapping (EIM).

Update:
: This document clarifies that this port overlapping behavior
    may be extended to connections originating from different internal
    source IP addresses and ports as long as their destinations are
    different.

    The following mechanism MAY be implemented by a NAT:

    > If destination addresses and ports are different for outgoing
    > connections started by local clients, a NAT MAY assign the same
    > external port as the source ports for the connections.  The
    > port overlapping mechanism manages mappings between external
    > packets and internal packets by looking at and storing their
    > 5-tuple (protocol, source address, source port, destination
    > address, and destination port).

   This enables concurrent use of a single NAT external port for
   multiple transport sessions, which allows a NAT to successfully
   process packets in a network that has a limited number of IP
   addresses (e.g., deployment with a high address space
   multiplicative factor (refer to Appendix B of [@?RFC6269])).

# Address Pooling Paired (APP)

The "IP address pooling" behavior of "Paired" (APP) was recommended
in REQ-2 from [RFC4787], but the behavior when an external IPv4 runs
out of ports was left undefined.

Clarification:
: This document clarifies that if APP is enabled, new
    sessions from a host that already has a mapping associated with an
    external IP that ran out of ports SHOULD be dropped.  A
    configuration parameter MAY be provided to allow a NAT to start
    using ports from another external IP address when the one that
    anchored the APP mapping ran out of ports.  Tweaking this
    configuration parameter is a trade-off between service continuity
    and APP strict enforcement.  Note, this behavior is sometimes
    referred to as "soft-APP".

    As a reminder, the recommendation for the particular case of a CGN
    is that an implementation must use the same external IP address
    mapping for all sessions associated with the same internal IP
    address, be they TCP, UDP, ICMP, something else, or a mix of
    different protocols [RFC6888].

Update:
: This behavior SHOULD apply also for TCP.


# Endpoint-Independent Mapping (EIM) Protocol Independence

REQ-1 from [RFC4787] and REQ-1 from [RFC5382] do not specify whether
EIM are protocol dependent or protocol independent.  For example, if
an outbound TCP SYN creates a mapping, it is left undefined whether
outbound UDP packets can reuse such mapping.

Update:
: EIM mappings SHOULD be protocol dependent.  A configuration
    parameter MAY be provided to allow protocols that multiplex TCP
    and UDP over the same source IP address and port number to use a
    single mapping.  The default value of this configuration parameter
    MUST be protocol-dependent EIM.

    This update is consistent with the stateful Network Address and
    Protocol Translation from IPv6 Clients to IPv4 Servers (NAT64)
    [RFC6146] that clearly specifies three binding information bases
    (TCP, UDP, and ICMP).

# Endpoint-Independent Filtering (EIF) Protocol Independence

REQ-8 from [RFC4787] and REQ-3 from [RFC5382] do not specify whether
mappings with Endpoint-Independent Filtering (EIF) are protocol
independent or protocol dependent.  For example, if an outbound TCP
SYN creates a mapping, it is left undefined whether inbound UDP
packets matching that mapping should be accepted or rejected.

Update:
: EIF filtering SHOULD be protocol dependent.  A configuration
    parameter MAY be provided to make it protocol independent.  The
    default value of this configuration parameter MUST be protocol-
    dependent EIF.

    This behavior is aligned with the update in Section 5.

    Applications that can be transported over a variety of transport
    protocols and/or support transport fallback schemes won't
    experience connectivity failures if the NAT is configured with
    protocol-independent EIM and protocol-independent EIF.

# Endpoint-Independent Filtering (EIF) Mapping Refresh

The NAT mapping Refresh direction may have a "NAT Inbound refresh
behavior" of "True" according to REQ-6 from [RFC4787], but [RFC4787]
does not clarify how this behavior applies to EIF mappings.  The
issue in question is whether inbound packets that match an EIF
mapping but do not create a new session due to a security policy
should refresh the mapping timer.

Clarification:
: This document clarifies that even when a NAT has an
    inbound refresh behavior set to "TRUE", such packets SHOULD NOT
    refresh the mapping.  Otherwise, a simple attack of a packet every
    two minutes can keep the mapping indefinitely.

Update:
: This behavior SHOULD apply also for TCP.

## Outbound Mapping Refresh and Error Packets

Update:
: In the case of NAT outbound refresh behavior, ICMP Errors or
    TCP RST outbound packets sent as a response to inbound packets
    SHOULD NOT refresh the mapping.  Other packets that indicate the
    host is not interested in receiving packets MAY be configurable to
    also not refresh state, such as a Session Traversal Utilities for
    NAT (STUN) error response [@?RFC5389] or IKE INVALID_SYNTAX
    [@?RFC7296].

8.  Port Parity

Update:
: A NAT MAY disable port parity preservation for all dynamic
    mappings.  Nevertheless, A NAT SHOULD support means to explicitly
    request to preserve port parity (e.g., [@?RFC7753]).

    Note: According to [@?RFC6887], dynamic mappings are said to be
    dynamic in the sense that they are created on demand, either
    implicitly or explicitly:

    1. Implicit dynamic mappings refer to mappings that are created
        as a side effect of traffic such as an outgoing TCP SYN or
        outgoing UDP packet.  Implicit dynamic mappings usually have a
        finite lifetime, though this lifetime is generally not known
        to the client using them.

    2. Explicit dynamic mappings refer to mappings that are created
        as a result, for example, of explicit Port Control Protocol
       (PCP) MAP and PEER requests.  Explicit dynamic mappings have a
       finite lifetime, and this lifetime is communicated to the
       client.

# Port Randomization

Update:
: A NAT SHOULD follow the recommendations specified in
    Section 4 of [RFC6056], especially:

    > A NAPT that does not implement port preservation [RFC4787]
    > [RFC5382] SHOULD obfuscate selection of the ephemeral port of a
    > packet when it is changed during translation of that packet.
    > 
    > A NAPT that does implement port preservation SHOULD obfuscate
    > the ephemeral port of a packet only if the port must be changed
    > as a result of the port being already in use for some other
    > session.
    > 
    > A NAPT that performs parity preservation and that must change
    > the ephemeral port during translation of a packet SHOULD
    > obfuscate the ephemeral ports.  The algorithms described in
    > this document could be easily adapted such that the parity is
    > preserved (i.e., force the lowest order bit of the resulting
    > port number to 0 or 1 according to whether even or odd parity
    > is desired).

# IP Identification (IP ID)

Update:
: A NAT SHOULD handle the Identification field of translated
    IPv4 packets as specified in Section 5.3.1 of [@!RFC6864].

#  ICMP Query Mappings Timeout

Section 3.1 of [RFC5508] specifies that ICMP Query mappings are to be
maintained by a NAT.  However, the specification doesn't discuss
Query mapping timeout values.  Section 3.2 of [RFC5508] only
discusses ICMP Query session timeouts.

Update:
: ICMP Query mappings MAY be deleted once the last session
    using the mapping is deleted.

#  Hairpinning Support for ICMP Packets

REQ-7 from [RFC5508] specifies that a NAT enforcing Basic NAT must
support traversal of hairpinned ICMP Query sessions.

Clarification:
: This implicitly means that address mappings from
    external address to internal address (similar to Endpoint-
    Independent Filters) must be maintained to allow inbound ICMP
    Query sessions.  If an ICMP Query is received on an external
    address, a NAT can then translate to an internal IP.

REQ-7 from [RFC5508] specifies that all NATs must support the
traversal of hairpinned ICMP Error messages.

Clarification:
: This behavior requires a NAT to maintain address
    mappings from external IP address to internal IP address in
    addition to the ICMP Query mappings described in Section 3.1 of
    [RFC5508].

# Security Considerations

NAT behavioral considerations are discussed in [@!RFC4787], [@!RFC5382],
and [@!RFC5508].

Because some of the clarifications and updates (e.g., Section 2) are
inspired from NAT64, the security considerations discussed in
Section 5 of [@!RFC6146] apply also for this specification.

The update in Section 3 allows for an optimized NAT resource usage.
In order to avoid service disruption, the NAT must not invoke this
functionality unless the packets are to be sent to distinct
destination addresses.

Some of the updates (e.g., Sections 7, 9, and 11) allow for increased
security compared to [@!RFC4787], [@!RFC5382], and [@!RFC5508].
Particularly,

* the updates in Sections 7 and 11 prevent an illegitimate node to
    maintain mappings activated in the NAT while these mappings should
    be cleared, and

* port randomization (Section 9) complicates tracking hosts located behind a NAT.

Sections 4 and 12 propose updates that increase the serviceability of
a host located behind a NAT.  These updates do not introduce any
additional security concerns to [RFC4787], [RFC5382], and [RFC5508].

The updates in Sections 5 and 6 allow for a better NAT transparency
from an application standpoint.  Hosts that require a restricted
filtering behavior should enable specific policies (e.g., Access
Control List (ACL)) either locally or by soliciting a dedicated
security device (e.g., firewall).  How a host updates its filtering
policies is out of scope of this document.

The update in Section 8 induces security concerns that are specific
to the protocol used to interact with the NAT.  For example, if PCP
is used to explicitly request parity preservation for a given
mapping, the security considerations discussed in [RFC6887] should be
taken into account.

The update in Section 10 may have undesired effects on the
performance of the NAT in environments in which fragmentation is
massively experienced.  Such an issue may be used as an attack vector
against NATs.

{backmatter}

# Acknowledgements

Thanks to Dan Wing, Suresh Kumar, Mayuresh Bakshi, Rajesh Mohan, Lars
Eggert, Gorry Fairhurst, Brandon Williams, and David Black for their
review and discussion.

Many thanks to Ben Laurie for the SecDir review and Dan Romascanu for
the Gen-ART review.

Dan Wing proposed some text for the configurable errors in
Section 7.1.

# Contributors

The following individual contributed text to the document:

    Sarat Kamiset
    Insieme Networks
    United States

